The Senate Committee on Elections and Constitutional Amendments will come to order.
In response to the COVID-19 emergency, and it still is with us and to protect the public
legislators and employees, we must limit non-essential gatherings and adhere to social distancing
and face covering guidelines.
In compliance with those orders, the Senate has made necessary adjustments to normal practices
in order to ensure that the public continues to have access to the legislative process.
We are holding our committee hearing in the O Street Building in room 2200.
In the committee room joining me today is Senator Newman.
Welcome Senator Newman.
We also have joining us the California Secretary of State, Dr. Shirley Weber, representatives
from the Legislative Analysts Office, the Fair Political Practice Commission, and organizations
who typically use the Cal Access, and I'm going to explain to those who are new to this
process what Cal Access means, to file and organize data in the system.
There will be two remote participants, Stacey Owens representing the California Political
Treasures Association and Daniel Newman representing MapLite.
For our remote participants, please mute your phones or computers.
This will greatly aid in eliminating any acoustic feedback.
I ask that every time you wish to be recognized that you use the raise your hand feature in
the program.
Each time you are recognized to speak, a pop up window will appear asking if you'd like
to unmute.
Please unmute before you begin speaking.
Our IT personnel will put you back on mute when you're done.
Once recognized to speak, please make sure you can be seen on the screen, state your
name, and then you're ready to address the committee.
To allow the public access, we've admitted members of the public into the hearing room
to the extent that social distancing requirements allow, and we'll be using a teleconference
service for those individuals who wish to testify today.
For all individuals wishing to provide public comment, the participant toll free number
and access code is posted on our committee website.
It will be displayed on the screen, and I will announce it now.
Today's participant number is 877-226-8163, and the access code is 736-2834.
For detailed instructions on how the teleconference system works, please refer to the Senate Committee
website.
For today's hearing, we'll be hearing all the witnesses on the agenda prior to taking
any public comment.
Once we've heard all the witnesses, we'll have a public comment period for those who
wish to comment on today's agenda's topic.
Please note that in order for us to hear you clearly and to avoid acoustic feedback, you
must mute the device you are watching the hearing on prior to giving testimony over
the phone.
It's important that we hear from you, and we thank you for your patience.
I will maintain decorum during the hearing as is customary, and any individual who is
disruptive may be removed from the remote meeting service or have their connections
muted.
Okay, I got the border plate out of the way.
So this morning's hearing, we will be examining the ongoing struggles and challenges as it
relates to the CAL access system and the CAL access replacement system, which is known
as CARS.
But for the uninitiated, let me, it's a great trivia question, what does CAL access mean?
I'm not going to ask anybody here in the room, so you're not going to be put on the spot.
But it stands for the California Automated Lobby Activity and Campaign Contribution and
Expenditure Search System, the first letter of all those words commonly referred to as
CAL access.
So, Lobby Activity Campaign Expenditure Disclosure.
But you know, before we get into this topic in a great depth, I wanted to begin with some
notes of appreciation.
I've always been an admirer of history and what that has taught us and those who were
involved in the work that we stand on their shoulders for.
And I want to begin by expressing my appreciation to Senator Carnett, who in 1997 recognized
that greater disclosure and transparency in lobbying and campaigns was a good thing and
passed legislation that began what became the CAL access system in the year 2000.
It wasn't too long into that implementation that it became clear that the system was struggling
and needed upgrades and improvements, according to, I think it was the Assembly Elections
Committee Analysis.
In 2011, the system went down for an entire month.
So in second note of appreciation goes to Senator Yee, who in 2013 recognizing this
problem asked that a feasibility study be done to figure out what we can do to improve
the system.
Unfortunately, his legislation, which did pass the legislature, was vetoed by Governor
Brown, our friend, who felt that it was, quote, costly and unnecessary, not to give
up Senator Lara, our current insurance commissioner, authored legislation in 2014 to rebuild the
system.
It passed the legislature, but was also vetoed by Governor Brown, who felt that there were
other projects that were ongoing in the Secretary of State's office that were more important,
though he acknowledged that the system had its problems.
Third, I want to acknowledge and give appreciation to then Secretary of State, Alex Padilla,
who in 2015 initiated on his own a new function in Cal Access called the Power Search Function,
which allowed individuals to be able to look at individual data combined together.
So you could see who was giving to multiple candidates rather than just the flat who gave
at this one point in time.
And I think there was a lot of appreciation for then Secretary of State's Padilla as initiative
in providing that enhanced function.
Which brings us to 2016.
Senator Hertzberg, with the co-authorship of the Secretary of State, Alex Padilla, passed
legislation that was eventually signed by the Governor to provide a significant enhancement
in the Cal Access system.
At the time, Secretary of State Alex Padilla called Cal Access, quote, at Frankenstein's
monster of code, unquote, that is in need of, quote, a complete rebuild, unquote.
In the assembly analysis in 2016 of Senator Hertzberg's bill, they quoted the Secretary
of State's office and said that the existing system, which is what we have today, this
is in 2016, is fueled by a complex array of computer applications written in 14 different
programming languages, including hardware, firmware, and software.
Some no longer supported by their vendor that are beyond their useful age.
This is in 2016.
As a result, the Cal Access system has denied public access, gone offline, and put strain
on the Secretary of State's staff resources.
In November 2011, and they repeat the fact that I shared earlier, the system went down
for most of the month of December.
Thank you to, I think it was Nicole Becker from the Assembly Elections Committee for
the work that she did in that analysis.
So it brought us to what we're examining today, which was SB 1349 by Senator Hertzberg.
And Senator Hertzberg, no reason to say what was obvious then and now.
He says this about Cal Access.
He says, transparency is crucial to a vibrant democracy.
California was once at the forefront of providing transparency when it launched Cal Access in
2000.
So voters could find campaign finance and lobbying disclosures online.
But it has not been significantly changed or upgraded since, and it's now an antiquated
user unfriendly system that is unstable and prone to outages.
Senator Hertzberg argued that his measure would bring the latest technology to make
it quick and easy to search.
And in that year, he pursued funding through the budget for the system to be upgraded and
was able to begin the successful funding of that system improvement.
At that time, the assessment of the cost of this upgrade or this rebooting of Cal Access
according to the Assembly Appropriations Committee analysis was, the Secretary of State said
the cost would be $11.6 million to develop, test, and implement the new system and ongoing
cost of $2.8 million related to operating and maintaining the system.
And that legislation, as I think I mentioned, passed with no votes.
And the specific direction in that legislation was that it would be operational in 2019.
They gave the room for the Secretary to delay, I think up to six months if they felt the
system wasn't ready to go in 2019.
So as we know, that did not come to be.
I asked our wonderful Senate elections consultant to get the data points on how much expenditures
were happening when this system was established and what it is today, and I wanted to share
that with you, that in 2001 and 2002, there was $613 million in campaign expenditures
and it came from 549,000 individual entities, $613 million.
When Senator Hertzberg's legislation was passed in 2016, we were up to $1.5 billion in campaign
expenditures.
And today, in the 21-22 year, we had $2.3 billion in campaign expenditures from 1.389
million contributors.
So from when the system was first envisioned and implemented, we've had almost a four-fold
increase in campaign contributions and we've had a tripling of individual donors that this
system is supposed to track.
So I thought that was an interesting bit of factoids that put things in perspective.
So we do know that the Secretary made a decision in 19 to delay, and the current Secretary
Weber made a thoughtful decision in 2021 that the system was not ready to be implemented.
All the work that had been done was for naught.
This of course comes after the legislature allocated and the project had spent over $30
million.
So it's my hope that this hearing today from the Secretary and from various stakeholders
will give us an update as to what happened, why was the system not able to be implemented,
what were the shortcomings at that time that did not allow it to go forward.
I know there is a plan for how we're going to try to do it better, and I'm sure the Secretary
will speak to that.
But this perspective is important to us.
The legislature, we've passed this requirement, again, unanimous votes by partisan, provided
the money, and yet it's still not in place.
So we're going to hear from the Secretary, we're going to hear from the Legislative
Analysts Office, we're going to hear from the Fair Political Praxis Commission, which
have been partners in this ongoing effort to make these changes, and with many other
stakeholders, which I know will bring us important perspective.
I want to again welcome and thank Senator Newman from our committee for joining me today.
I want to give him the opportunity to make any opening remarks.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, good morning everybody.
So nice to see everyone.
I had no idea CalX had such a cult following here in the Capitol.
So we are today exercising our oversight obligation, something I think we don't do often enough.
I commend the Chair for doing that.
Welcome, Secretary Weber, welcome to your staff.
And as the Chair has delineated at CalX, this is a very important repository and tool that
gets used in many ways.
Today's product is the result of a bunch of statutory initiatives, the work of successive
secretaries of state, appreciate the burden you inherited, Secretary Weber.
But as the analysis and as the Chair's statements make clear, there have clearly been issues
related to the operation of the legacy systems, and the current challenge is how to then overlay
a new system on top of that, and I appreciate just how challenging that is.
And that's what we're here today to discuss, how to do that expediently, and effectively
I'm particularly interested in the FPPC's input today about how we not only currently
solve the current problem while ensuring transparency and accountability per all of the work that
went into this, but also ensuring that in the future we can update the system and improve
it and ensure continuity and ease of operation.
So with that, thank you to the Chair.
Thank you for everybody for being here.
I will note that among the people who are not here is Senator Hertzberg, who is I guess
technically still a member of this August body, but has termed out, appreciate all the
work that he has done in this area, and other places.
So you're left with the two of us, Senator Leyva, Senator Nielsen also would be here,
but are moving on to new phases in their lives.
So glad to be here today looking forward to the conversation, and this is an important
issue that we need to drill down on.
So thank you, Mr. Chair.
Terrific.
Thank you, Senator Newman.
Well, first we want to welcome to the committee hearing room our Secretary of State, Dr. Shirley
Weber.
Dr. Weber, you've had a good perspective on this issue prior to your service here as our
Secretary of State.
You, of course, served in the Assembly, served on the Elections Committee in the Assembly.
I think you heard the Hertzberg bill in 2016, so you have history on this for a lot of years,
and we welcome your testimony today.
Well, thank you very much.
And I want to, it's red.
Does it work now?
Is it working?
Okay.
Great.
Thank you.
Good morning, Chair Glazier, and good morning to Senator Newman.
I'm pleased to be with you here this morning.
I want to thank you for the opportunity for us in SOS to come and share with you what we're
doing and the challenges that we faced and we continue to face and the resolution to some
of those challenges.
I want to thank the Chair for allowing us to postpone the meeting that we're having
today as we have to today, to the 29th, in order to deal with so many issues that we
were facing, obviously, with the elections, and much of my staff totally committed to
making sure that the election was fair and transparent and accurate and everything else.
And we're still counting ballots.
I think we still have a quarter of a million ballots to count, and the process, the more
legislation we create, the more complicated it becomes in terms of dealing with ballots
that are mailed in in different ways and all those kinds of things.
But nonetheless, I appreciate your willingness to allow us to delay the hearing until today
and appreciate those of you who come, as well as appreciate the history that you've given
us about the project itself.
I won't waste time telling us what CARS, Cal Access and CARS is.
Their terms are often interchangeable, but clearly Cal Access is the current system we
have and CARS is the future system that we're trying to build at this time.
So we have a clarity, at least with regards to that.
And I know oftentimes myself and others, we use the term interchangeably when we shouldn't,
but hopefully people will understand that.
As most of you know, I became Secretary of State in 2021, January of 2021, a surprise
present from the governor.
And I appreciate his confidence and nomination of me, a nomination that I had not anticipated
at all in my career.
But I appreciate it because I had worked, not only with budget issues, but also worked
as you pointed out as the chair of elections and then continued to serve on the elections
committee even after I became the chair of the budget, mainly because I wanted to make
sure there was some continuity with regards to the election committee and that it was
not taken as just something to be done as a responsibility rather than something as
a passion.
I want to thank your staff, Scott, who was adamant about helping me with the election
committee when he was on my staff and the work that he did, he truly was a champion
of elections and has continued to be that in the process.
When I became Secretary of State in 2021, I came in with the understanding and with
the information that I had received just on the surface that CARS would go live in 2021.
And at the end of June 2021, there would be a celebration for CARS, and that was something
that I would look forward to.
It was like, whew, I don't have to deal with CARS, it's done, it's over, and it's going
to be successful.
Shortly thereafter, and as I pointed out to all of the leadership and members of what
I met with them as I became Secretary of State, and I'm not sure if it was a good thing to
say or not, but I said to them, there's nothing I hate more than someone who says to me, after
the fact, I started to tell you, but, and then they didn't, and as a result of that,
they didn't tell me, and because they thought I didn't want to hear it or that they just
didn't want to reveal things at that point.
And so that was a statement I made to my staff and the new staff and as well as the current
staff in SOS, and immediately people started to tell me the things that I hoped I wouldn't
hear.
And those were the things with regards to the issues of data migration, the high number
of testing defects, the negative feedback from the user community, and those kinds of
things.
When we looked at the data and I met with all of those that were involved with the project,
it was clear that there was not a person who was in defense of the system.
Even those who initially said, yes, it's ready to go, by the time we began to ask questions
and continue to probe into it, whether they were directly involved or indirectly involved
with the system, all of them resolved at the point that June 30th, that was unrealistic,
that they were not ready, it was not ready to go live.
There was no user testing above 40% with regards in terms of acceptance.
And so as a result, and it was not going to get there because there was no effort to test
again and again and again.
So it became clear to me that there was no confidence in the readiness to launch the
system.
We could have done the politically correct thing and launched the system and blamed everybody
else for its failures.
But I thought California deserved better.
And as a result, we proceeded to try to figure out what was wrong and what we could do.
As I said, we asked everyone who was involved with the system who was technically working
on the system, whether we consulted the California Department of Technology that was not really
involved with the system, that I thought they were and could have been and should have been,
but they weren't based on the structure of the kinds of things that were taking place.
So we had to then ask the question, how do we, where do we go from here?
Because I asked the question, how soon will it be ready?
No one knew.
Where are we in the process?
No one could say we're at stage three and we need to get to stage four or whatever the
terminology they wanted to use.
No one could ensure me that this thing would work.
And that was concerning to me as we tried to move forward.
My response was with the input from California Department of Technology, CDT.
I made what proved to be a prudent decision to have an independent assessment of the system,
the system's readiness to determine the future course of action to ensure the successful
completion of the CARS project.
So rather than continuing down a road that no one knew where we were going, I decided
at that point we need to figure out where we were.
Where are we in this process and how do we get back to resolving the issue and how do
we get CARS moving again?
I paused the ongoing development work except for some data preparation activities that
would be useful for both the current and or future project activities.
We partnered with the California Department of Technology to create the solicitation tool,
document for the independent assessment, review and evaluate the responses, and oversee the
six-month independent assessment review process.
And I should mention all of this, that once we had had this conversation, made some determinations
and looked around, we also made sure that the governor, the leaders in both houses were
aware of the challenges we faced and the fact that we were postponing the launch and that
we wanted to do an independent assessment to see where we were.
At the same time as the independent assessment, internally within SOS, we conducted an inventory
of the existing CARS project team organization structure and a robust lesson learned survey
led by the organizational change management consultant.
We recognized, at least in the initial phases, I was questioning and asking that there were
clearly some structural internal issues with how we were operating the project or how we
were trying to get the project off.
And those management issues needed to be addressed if we were actually to move forward.
We couldn't just continue to move forward as if there had been no issues internally
within SOS in terms of our IT department, management department, those who were involved
in a tremendous amount of challenges in terms of personnel itself and that we needed to
have a whole new way of thinking with regards to this project and the management of it.
The independent assessment report concluded that CARS was not ready for public use and
stated that a solution to replace CARS access is possible.
The report identified, and I'm sure most of you have seen the early on report, the report
identified the reusable work products of the current project such as data cleansing, readiness
planning documents and processes, project management plan documents and processes, and
some prior market research questionnaires and findings.
And they recommended needed actions to develop a successful system.
Based on this information and input from the project leadership team, the CARS project
restarted in July with what I believe is a more robust path to completing the CARS project
successfully.
As the CARS project was being restarted, our SOS ITD department, our Information Technology
Division was tasked with developing a strategy to maintain the health and reliability of
the existing CARS access system.
We realized that this was an old system that didn't have, that had basically much of the
things that we normally use in the system were no longer available, and I charged them
with the fact that you're going to have to figure out a system that's going to keep this
thing alive while we're basically building a new system.
Our Information Technology Division supports, as we're restarting it, as I said, they were
tasked with the development strategies to maintain the health and reliability of the
system.
Our Information Technology Division supports, monitors and maintains the many software programs
of the CARS access system to make the services more maintainable without negatively impacting
current usage.
These services are built on a platform that is no longer supported by any vendors.
Because CARS access was designed and implemented based on the hardware and programming language
limitations of the time it was created, the system cannot be upgraded to meet the modern
demands of the current campaign finance and lobbying activities reporting environment.
As a result, the legacy systems such as CARS access become slower and slower over time,
which means performance, efficiency, and productivity can also be decreased.
ITD has made several significant changes in operations to enhance the stability, recovery,
and support of the CARS access system.
Most importantly, ITD has created a CARS access recovery task force group that monitors system
issues and outages 24 hours a day, seven days a week.
ITD incorporated monitoring and reporting capability alerts when CARS access core components
can become unreachable, unavailable, or triggered by a defined threshold.
ITD has also taken steps to protect the existing platform against catastrophic failure, including
one they developed a disaster recovery strategy, they established cloud archive backups, backup
retention schedules, and procedures that are critical to the recovery of CARS access critical
business applications and data, and they developed a detailed recovery procedure, including manual
processes that support the recovery strategy and provide for the recovery of critical business
applications.
Over the last several months, most outages impacting CARS access have been attributed
to incidents involving significant damage outside of SOS control.
ITD is working with an internet service provider to provide redundancy, which would reduce
dependency on a single connection, resulting in fewer outages.
ITD plans on making CARS access more reliable by upgrading components.
In the event of a catastrophic incident, the CARS access systems are backed up nightly
and restored in several locations.
Finally, ITD, our information technology division continues to investigate new ways to maintain
the existing CARS access system and its performance, such as exploring places CARS access on new
hardware.
I want to thank our California Department of Technology for important role it has played
to set the CARS project in the right course.
In closing some of the comments, I want to thank those for having me to provide this
presentation.
Our team here today with SOS, our SOST is in Margie Hyder, who is the acting chief of
our political reform division, Tristan Comier, who is the chief information technology division,
Tamara Johnson, who is the chief budget officer, John Heimlund, who is the assistant project
director, and Michael Carter, our special project advisor.
Some of you have asked, in addition to that, some of the other questions that have been
posed to us on a regular basis is, you know, what confidence do we have that this will
work this time?
And I think that's always the question that's there.
Let me say this, we have learned much from our past experiences, which guides much of
the actions we are discussing today.
You know, when I say that I asked everyone in SOS about the project itself and what's
going on and what's your assessment of it, I discovered that most of the folks in SOS
had no contact or commitment to the project itself, that it had relied heavily upon outside
individuals to run the project, and that our own people inside, not only in our ITD department
but California Department of Technology, had no real engagement and involvement with the
project itself.
So therefore, it made it difficult to determine who was running the project and where we were.
We have learned much from the past experience, which guides, as I said, our actions that
we discussed today.
The project is leveraging the Department of Technology's project approval cycle, the
PAL planning process, which is a formal and deliberate process based on project management
industry standards and best practices.
It is defined in the State System Information Management Manual.
The SOS and the CDT have executed a memorandum of understanding that requires the CDT project
planning and oversight services on the project.
The project's business and technology subject matter expertise is strong, including several
staff who have worked at the SOS and the business and technology side for several years.
The project has proactively increased the number of staff in the organization who hold
project management certification and have robust project management experience.
The project has appropriately staffed the project in terms of skills and expertise to
ensure that all activities will be completed in a timely manner.
For this reason, I have high confidence that the project will successfully complete itself.
Because we have a team that's working inside, as well as with others, that will be brought
in to basically ensure that the project is our project, that it is working and we have
the expertise that's there.
We've hired the necessary individuals, we've increased the staff of those who can manage
the project, who can actually work on the project itself, but also who are a part of
the CARS recovery team, the Cal Access recovery team that's there that's working 24-7 to
make sure that this project, that our CARS project, the Access, will basically be able
to survive during this project itself.
As I pointed out, they have regularly decided different places to place the data, to put
the information nightly, so that if anything were to happen, that they could recover it
and that they could do the work themselves.
Some have asked, you've asked about finances.
We've given you the data on the amount of money, you've seen the money that's been
spent.
Over the last two years, we have, our data shows us that we have, during the pause period,
we had $10 million and this was at the beginning of the project before it was paused in June
and July.
$7 million was spent and that was mainly for dealing with the issues of data migration
and other things that were already in process.
This past 22-23 budget has been $11,289, that's actually been it.
The budget, the actual expenditure has only been $208,792 because we have, were basically
pause the project, working on the documents that we have to put together and basically
going out and doing solicitation.
So we have not continued to just expend money on the project without having direct information
as to who would be doing the project and those kinds of things.
You've also asked about the outages and I think we've, I've answered those.
I'm not sure if there's more that's needed but we have worked to make sure that those
outages do not, the ones that, that folks have mostly been concerned about were ones
beyond our control.
It was not necessarily, it was had to do with CDT and many of their issues and so the project
was delayed or shut down during that timeframe but they were not due to SOS.
As I said, we have a 24-7 project that's going on with our office, with our ITD department
and chairs here that basically addresses the issues quickly and, and, and deals with it
very quickly.
To avoid any catastrophe, as I pointed out, we have nightly removed the data to different
places.
We have been working with various vendors in terms of internet, storage, those kinds of
things so that we're not just ignoring the fact that this is not broken down, that it
might, if it did, we could recover it and so our staff, our team, we have a team of
those who basically deal with the, the Cal Access 24-7 to make sure that it is functional
and we're looking for various other forms of, of storage and placement for a platform
for, for that data that's there.
So we're aware of the fact that the system is old and as a result have given a tremendous
attention to make sure that it can survive during this process.
We are committed to making sure that Cal Access will, will survive until we have cars in place.
We have, like I said, we've recruited experienced staff to avoid over-reliance on contracted
staff.
We need to, we, we believe we need to lead and direct the project rather than relying
upon contract project managers that are outside of Cal SOS.
The project schedule should be realistic.
We have not identified, as some of you've asked, how much money will we need?
We have not identified that because we haven't hired the person who's going to do the work.
We don't want to give unrealistic expectations that it's going to cost a certain amount and
it'll discover that that's not going to happen because, because it demands other kinds of
things.
Cal, you know, the Cal Access and cars is, is a extremely complicated, as you know, project
that has a lot of demands and a lot of expectations on what we want to happen when a person goes
into that and pushes those buttons and those things that happen.
It sounds easy, but it's really complicated and as a result, we want to make sure that
it does that.
We've been working with, and I'm grateful for all of those who are listed here who
will be testifying today.
We have met with all of those individuals.
We've worked with them.
In addition to that, why I believe we have so many folks now that are working with us
because they want cars to be successful.
My staff meets monthly with all of the partners, external partners and internal partners.
We met with different groups concerning things they'd like to have added to cars.
We've said to them very clearly, we're listing and we want to make that happen, but we will
not delay the project because of a new fangle dangle that might be out there that somebody
can add to it.
We know that like anything else, a dissertation or wherever, there's never completion, there's
never an end, but you have to draw an end to it and we want to make sure cars meets
all of the needs that have been identified in the legislature and if we can add additional
things as we've met with the individuals who are working with elections that small things
like signatures and what have you that people think we should not have to have now and being
able to file things without everybody having to come in and sign.
All those kinds of things that really complicate people's lives are things that we may be able
to accomplish and so we're listening to individuals.
We have everyone that's on board that's meeting, our staff is meeting with all of our partners
every month, like I said, a monthly and we're making the information available.
We hope that the project that they will have some input and I think all of them are having
input in the project that's there.
So we've learned a lot from the past process that was there in terms of who needs to be
engaged, how people should be engaged, what our goals should be, what we should be focused
on and not driven necessarily by time and limitations and saying that people say well
it has to be ready in a year but that was one of the problems of the other project.
There were constant folks giving deadlines and things that were unrealistic and demanding
the use of software that didn't meet the needs and so in this process of looking at where
we were and reviewing we realized that we had to have a different process, different
working operations and that we're thankful to the CDT and for those that are working
on the project and all of the community members who have allowed us the opportunity to begin
the project again and to get it done for California.
Thank you Dr. Weber.
First let me just applaud you and your department for running these elections that we're just
completing in a terrific, fair, honest, transparent way.
You should never take those things for granted and I should have said that at the beginning.
I apologize for that but we're so grateful for you and your department and all the election
officials in California who have done such a good, exceptional job in our elections that
we're just finishing.
Let me also say that I appreciate your caution and sensitivity in making projections going
forward.
As we recount the history it steals us to not repeating in a lot of different ways and
certainly not trying to be as realistic and straightforward about cost and completion
as one of those elements.
I do want to ask a couple of follow-up questions if I may on the issue of outages.
I appreciate the outages that have been caused by outside forces and you mentioned those
but I'm interested in knowing how many outages have there been that are internally focused
in the system and you may not have experts here who can answer that if you're not able
to but I'd like to know over the last 10 years how many have there been?
10 years.
Every year.
I do have.
You get the alerts.
You said you've created systems that allow you to find out when there's a problem.
We get the alerts.
I'm not sure if people if there are actual outages versus access to data and information
may not be readily available because the system is sometimes slow.
I do have my ITD person here and Christian is here.
I think there's some microphone somewhere behind me that can probably answer that question.
It sounds daunting when you think about the numbers but if you actually look at it in
terms of what those numbers mean and he's much more tech savvy than I would ever be
so I'll allow Christian if you can answer some of that for us.
I don't know if I can go back 10 years but I can give you.
He was only 12 years old at the time so that's probably why.
Did you give us your name for the record?
Tristan Cormier.
Tristan.
Okay.
Thank you for being here.
So the question was how many outages?
In 21.
I'll simplify it.
In 21 or in 22 thus far how many I mean I've certainly gone on the system and not
been able to get information.
Yeah.
So there's four.
How many have there been?
So since 2022 there's been about four outages that are significant and we see outages.
There's something that we can't recover from that would take over 24 hours so about four.
Internally we haven't had too many outages.
On average we have probably about four to five outages that could be something as simple
as rebooting the web server and that lasts less than five to seven minutes.
So how many of those have there been again?
Where the system isn't working and unresponsive whether that's for a minute or an hour.
How many of those have internally now I'm only talking about within the system itself.
How many have there been this year so far?
Yeah.
Again I think there's two different questions so when it's not responsive again though those
are about four of those.
Internally?
They're both internal and external so if the system goes down for CDT or if the other
fiber goes down then we don't have it internally.
So if you're asking for about interruptions that could be slightly different.
So what we do is for example I'm talking about anything.
So an interruption would apply and something greater than that.
So I'm trying to get a sense of how broken is the system I mean so if it's running great
then tell me it's running great and we can all go back.
It's definitely a Frankenstein like we'll say before here's some statistics we can have
for the last several months.
For example in July we received about 176 alerts.
Alert for us is up and down.
On average it recovers in 2.8 minutes.
In August we had around 214 alerts.
Average time was 2.6 minutes.
In September we had 165 alerts.
Average recovery time 2.3 minutes.
In August we had 214 and in July we had 176 around 2.6 minutes.
So I appreciate that by month so look at what I can do with the math and it's an average
of 190 a month but in 21 how many alerts have there been?
Do you have a total number for 21?
I don't have that number off the top of my head would it be in 2021?
I think we implemented the alerting system in 2022 and so what we're talking about right
now is the CARTS team which is the Cadillac's rescue team.
All that was kind of created in 2022.
So do you have any way of giving me the facts on the alerts, outages, problems going back
in each year?
Do you have any way to give me?
Well I've only been here for not that long but I can tell you what have you know I can
give you some information about 2022 when we started doing the alerting.
So what we see is we monitor up-down statuses for Cadillac's and those can be something
as simple as a two-minute outage and then recover and then sometimes we have to kind
of intervene and maybe we start a service.
So I don't know what the number is off the top of my head.
I do have a couple of guys here who work on it.
I just don't have the number for 2021.
Okay, if you can get some of those facts for us if I appreciate it.
Secretary, I'm trying to understand a little bit better the decision to postpone and you
mentioned the stakeholders I know we're going to hear from them.
Were you able to consult with them on this decision to postpone in 2021?
You mentioned the three issues, data migration, testing, defects, feedback from the user community.
I know the FBPC and the legislation are partners with you and that's where they consulted and
the decision to delay.
All of them were involved with the staff and myself in terms of what was going on with
the project and whether or not there was anyone who could actually say this project was working.
In the end, they all agreed that the project needed to be delayed because it was not going
to do what was anticipated.
We got, like I said, the user testing and those kinds of things were clear.
So all those groups agreed the FBPC and others?
I'm not sure if they agreed.
They'd have to.
I think afterwards there was a meeting that all agreed at that point that could not go
forward.
That they were pleased that we had halted the project because of the data that we were
receiving that they had received before I had.
I mean, they were all aware of the user data that was there.
I was probably the last one to be informed that this project had a significant number
of problems.
And when I went back and looked at the, some of the budget language for the funding, this
is before you were, maybe you were chair of the Budget Committee at the time, but not
this, certainly not the Secretary of State, but the initial funding was to provide for
a going out to bid on vendors to help create, implement this reboot.
Who were the firms that were hired to do the work?
I don't remember the names.
I hadn't been asked that question, but I'm sure some of the, Margie might know.
She knows.
This is our, Margie was there doing the project.
And now she is the interim director of the project.
Yes.
Great.
Hi, Margie.
Can you identify yourself?
Yes.
My name is Margie Heider.
And I am the acting division chief for the political reform division.
So your question is who was- In 2016 and 2017, the Budget Act provided a million dollars
to go for a out to bid for that management technology help to implement this improvement.
Who was retained?
What firms were retained to do the work?
The system integrator that first developed the system, that company name was Prospecta.
Prospecta was the one that was retained?
Correct.
Prospecta or Prospecta?
Prospecta.
And what was the requirements of that contract?
I was not involved in the project at that time, but what I can tell you is the requirements
of the project, do you mean what was the system supposed to do?
What were they required to do for the many hundreds of thousands, if not millions of
dollars that they were paid?
I did not see the contract, so I can't tell you-
Okay.
Exactly.
Is that the only firm that was retained to do that work?
Correct.
So what I see in the budget documents that the secretary provided in 2018 and 2019 shows
an expenditure of $6.1 million for professional services.
Does that all go to the company called Prospecta?
I'm not sure.
Our financial person.
We have a new financial person here, and I'm not sure if she's familiar with that.
Exactly who the amount went to.
It probably was, at least the vast majority of it, yeah.
Okay.
And as a part of that contract, they had deliverables that they were required to provide.
That part of the agreement that was forged with that company?
I'm not sure if our attorneys here to deal with the contract said-
Let me say that.
Some of my concerns with the project, as I went into it, was the fact that there were
no deliverables identified.
It was time and work, but not necessarily specific deliverables.
And that is a concern that I had, and that is a concern that I've expressed in going
forward that the new contracts have to have deliverables attached to the resources that
they receive.
Yeah.
It was not a part of my understanding, it was not a part of it.
That would make a lot of sense.
So I don't want to assume this, so let me ask the question about whether or not there
was any kind of clawback provisions in those contracts that provided that if they weren't
able to deliver the services that they claimed they were providing in the state that we would
be reimbursed those funds.
I asked that question also, having spent my married life, married to an attorney and
a judge, that I wanted to know how do we get out of it and how do we get my money back.
That was not a part of the contract that I'm familiar with.
And I asked those questions.
That's one of the reasons why we decided to move forward with some of the data, the use
of resources with regards to data migration and what have you.
But those things were not in the contract.
And I was very concerned about the contract itself, with regards to what we were going
to get from it.
I'm familiar with good reason.
I'm not really familiar with this firm and their experience in this area and their lack
of performance.
That's the first time I've heard their name, Prospecta.
Is that a California firm?
Hi, so my name's Dana Furby.
I am one of the council that has been somewhat involved in the project, maybe longer than
a lot of the people here.
At least I knew enough about some of the time when Prospecta was the vendor that was building
the system and then when we actually pivoted and had a new vendor come on for the system.
So I want to make myself available to answer some of the questions that I, at least my
understanding of some of the answers.
I didn't negotiate the contracts or wasn't involved in them, but I did look at the contracts
quite a bit because at the time that it was clear we were going to make some changes throughout
the way I was advising and directing on what remedies were available to us and what, well,
mostly what remedies were available to us.
Great, and it would be great if we could get a copy of the contract.
But let me ask you a follow-up question.
Was it an Evergreen contract that provided services each year or month and this was renewed
and continued to be renewed or were there deliverables that were required as a part of the contract?
So the first contract that was with Prospecta and I'll just also add that the contract is
actually with Prospecta, the company changed their name to Prospecta during the process
of this.
What was the original name?
I believe it was Enterprise Services LLC or Incorporated Enterprise Services or Enterprise
Systems and we can get a copy of that contract.
That contract, my understanding, is that it was a deliverables-based contract.
So there were phases and there were certain deliverables that needed to be finished before
they would invoice us and be paid for those deliverables.
And then you said there was another vendor that's been retained.
Who's that?
Yes.
So we ended the contract with Prospecta when the project was not finishing to our satisfaction.
What year was that?
I believe that that was in 2020.
Okay.
This is before the actual 21 cancellation or postponement.
Yes.
So in 2020, you had a contract that began in 2017?
I'm not sure when it actually began, but I know that we terminated the contract before
the system had been finished and we did come to some terms with Prospecta over what they
would be paid and what they would not be paid and I believe that I have not looked at that
settlement document again recently, but we did not end up in litigation with Prospecta.
Okay.
And I assume it's a public document.
It's a public document.
We'd love to have a copy of that.
Yes.
Did you know in total what we paid that company, Prospecta?
I think that it was around, well, I think in total, it was probably a little over $4
million and I'm sorry, I'm not totally sure.
I know that the settlement agreement was for significantly less than they had were billing
for the time they had spent, but it was about $3.3 million.
So did you, when you canceled the contract in 2020, did you ask for your money back?
I mean, you said there's a settlement, did you pay them more money when you canceled
that contract?
So some of this, I want to be, well, what we did is we refused to pay the invoice and
said that what we were claiming at the time is that we shouldn't owe any of this money.
We don't have a finished product.
What I don't want to get into is things that our attorney client privileged that had to
do with the negotiations about that.
But you indicated that there were deliverables in the contract.
There were deliverables in the contract.
And was there a contemplation to litigating the fact that they were deliverables that
were not completed?
The secretary has identified a lot of the defects that remained at least in 2021.
Was there any consideration to asking for our money back?
There was consideration for asking for our money back.
And there was some consideration to just refusing to pay for the work that was done, for the
hours that were put in on the next phases up until the time we terminated the contract.
And then you indicated there was another vendor contract that was issued after that.
Who was that to?
After that, there was a company called OSAS.
Can you spell that for me?
O-S-A-A-S.
Yes.
I believe the S-A-A-S part stands for Software as a Service, I believe it's a local California
company.
Okay.
And so they were retained in 2020?
I believe they were retained in 2020.
And what was the essence of that contract?
That contract was not a deliverables-based contract.
That was a time and materials contract.
I think I believe the understanding there was we were still going to try to meet the
deadline, the statutorily mandated deadline.
And the way we were going that we thought we would be able to do that was by building
in a little more speed and flexibility.
So there was a software development process called Agile that I think they were trying
to follow at the time.
And.
Okay.
Okay. And when you said just to clarify, statually mandated, I'm not aware of that.
The 19 was the deadline in the legislation. So is there something else that occurred that
created a legal obligation on that office? Well, and again, I haven't prepared by looking at all
the statutes again, but I believe that as you stated in the beginning of this hearing that the
the promise was that it would be completed by 2021. I think there was, at one point,
there was some legislation that extended the date that cars was supposed to be finished. And I
believe that the reason for that extension was due to the California primary changing time.
I see. And there was not, there was agreement between everybody that we did not want to be
launching the system. Okay, I appreciate that clarification. So OSAAS was brought in 2020
on a times in materials. And are they still retained by the office? They're not. And what
happened in that regard? We decided to terminate the contract. When did you terminate the contract?
It was in 2021. 2021. And what was the reason for that? Well, we had decided, we decided as an
agency that the system was not ready to launch. And it was, and we terminated all the contracts
that eventually, you know, there was decisions to terminate the contracts that were in place.
Okay. And so there's no currently outside vendor attained by the office to assist in this now?
There is not a system integrator contract in place at this time. Okay. And when the original
contract was awarded to Prospecta in 2017, were there other bidders for that work?
I don't know. I'm assuming there was. You know, but you don't know whether it was a sole source
contract. The only person that stepped up and said we can, we can fix this. No, I don't know that.
And I wasn't actually employed with the agency until. All right. Well, thank you. Thank you very
much for that insight. I appreciate it very much. Secretary, you mentioned at the, in your remarks
that part of the good work that you're doing on accountability is to identify someone who's
actually in charge. And that your frustration upon coming into the office was that no one
really owned the project. No one was running the project. So there really was no project manager in
the office to run this project starting in 2017. Is that? Yeah. I, you know, when I say own it, well,
Marjorie can respond to it. You know, I, you know, when I ask a person, if I ask who's in charge,
who's really responsible for this, I expect somebody say I am. Okay. But there may be
any persons identified with that. Marjorie can respond to that. Yes. And so in the previous
iteration of the project, the, there was not an SOS person who was in charge of the project.
The project was being run by a project director that was a contracted employee. And one of the
things that we have learned is that that is not a good way to run a project. Currently,
what the secretary has done is made sure that there are SOS staff who are running the project.
So I am the project sponsor. So I am running the project with help from a project director who is
also a secretary of state employee with an assistant project director who is in the room today.
And with Tristan Cormier, who's the chief of the information technology director, we are the
leadership team, the main core of the leadership team. Terrific. And who is the project director?
Can you just share us that person's name so they are a real person? Yes, it is a real person.
And her name is Harjeet Basi, H-A-R-J-I-T-V-A-S-I. Right. And who was the project manager from
the vendor that was in charge of the project? What's that person's name? His name is Kevin Star.
Kevin Star, and he is an employee of Prospecta. No, he was OSAS. He was with the OSAS.
The OSAS group. Who was the project manager for Prospecta? I'm sorry. He was not OSAS. He was
independent. There was a different company. I'm sorry. He was not OSAS. He was with an independent
company. Right. And I'm sorry. I just don't know the name of the company. Right. But I had asked
earlier about outside vendors, and you'd mentioned to Prospecta, and then OSAS as the second. Is
there a third outside vendor then that was hired to help with this project? Several. Could you come
up to the record and share? I go back to my original question, which was who were the outside
vendors that were paid by the state to assist with this project? There was more than Prospecta
and OSAS. Prospecta and OSAS were both what we call system integrators. So there were several
other ancillary contracts that I do not have a list of. I can give you all of them from the
different periods. But the Kevin Star was hired to be the, I guess, what is generally the project
manager. I think we called him the system integration manager. Sam? But he was working for
another company that managed projects. So what's the name of his company? I'm sorry. I don't know.
I can't remember off the top of my head. We can get you that contract. It goes back to the same
questions I'd asked originally about Prospecta. Were there performance requirements in that
contract? Was it time and materials contract for this one and the others? And I understand you
may not have all the information here today, but I would like to have the committee would like to
have that information. All the vendor contracts that were implemented for the Cal access upgrade.
We can get you all the vendor contracts and I can explain in a timeline with those contracts
when they were hired and why. Okay. But offhand, you don't know of any of the others offhand,
the names of the other companies that have been retained. I'm sorry. If I tried to remember the
names, I think I would get them wrong. Okay. No problem. No problem. Thank you for going through
this with us. Secretary, I want to again thank you for your patience in these questions. But as
you can tell, you know, we're all concerned that when you have something that has broken down and
is able to work as you acknowledge, it's trying to figure out why as we look forward and how we're
going to do it better. But that looking back is a really important part of trying to figure out
what were those mistakes, who's in charge, you've correctly identified those weaknesses
in your testimony and we appreciate that. And let me just finish up with another question.
When you look at this issue of transparency, is that a new issue for California? It's an issue
across our country because the public's rightfully demands to know who's trying to influence our
government, who are the lobbyists, who are the donors and the like. Are there states that you
think have modeled good examples for finance disclosure portals that as you look around the
country that we should look to as good examples of this? Because we don't want to, you know,
build that first model, right? I mean, we are the tech capital of the world. And so you have
an expectation about our ability to do good technology here in our own state. But if you
looked around the country and would you identify some states that you think are doing it right?
We've begun to do that more recently. And, you know, it'd be very honest, you know, when coming
into office one and being confronted with this issue and battling all the challenges that are
there as well as running probably a record number of special elections in the 2021 and the recall
election and then going into the general election with all the election deniers and everything
else. So we've been lazily focused on that. But this is not by no means had taken a backseat
in my interest. Interestingly enough, I recently had been talking to our Secretary of State in
Colorado because they do a lot of innovative things and we've modeled ourselves after them
in many ways with regards to election. So I'll be talking with her concerning it. But to my surprise,
what was brought to me recently was Arkansas has a very good system like this that is able to handle
multiple things and runs quite well. I'm shocked because I'm from Arkansas. And I always think
of that as not necessarily being the most forward place in the world that I've visited. So I've
actually begun to inquire in Arkansas and hopefully we'll get a chance to now that we have a break to
basically talk with them and to visit Arkansas to see what their system looks like as well as some
of the others as we're meeting with the Secretaries of State across the nation to find out what other
systems are working well, knowing that we're larger than they are and that it may be more
difficult to handle the amount that we're dealing with. But nonetheless, you don't want to see what
they've done. Well, terrific. That's hometown pride. Yeah. Well, I'm not sure hometown pride,
but I didn't leave when the best condition in Arkansas. Well, I left a lot of relatives there
though, but but definitely was surprised to learn that they're probably have a system that works as
a small state. But nonetheless, there may be things we can learn from it. But I think, you know,
given the those that are working on the project now, and I have to say this in real pride of them,
because most of them have been with the project for a while now. And my goal is to try to keep
these people working on the project. I think one of the challenges oftentimes at the state level is
that we have people moving in and out so quickly that as you can see from some of the history of
what was in the project, a lot of those folks are gone. You know, when the project didn't work,
whatever it is, they packed up, they've gone as well, whether they're in house or whether
there were others have moved on, want to try to keep the team together because that provides a
consistency for what we want to do as well as the accountability as to who's responsible for
doing this project and getting this project accomplished much more than just a secretary.
And so I'm excited about the fact that this team has taken on the challenge
to complete this project and have pride in making sure that it does happen.
Some of them have been there doing this, the confusion of who's in charge, who's not in charge,
who's a new director. I mean, I had difficulty figuring out in the short period of time I had
to make a decision of go or no go on this project because it was a very short time frame that we
had to make a decision because all the publicity was saying come June 30th this is going to happen.
And we had probably a month or a month and a half to really realize that there were problems
that were there. And then, of course, trying to memorize all the names and all the people. And
as she mentioned, I kind of remember some of the names and the programs. There were so many
overlapping folks coming in to try to make this thing work that it just got, you know,
you didn't know who was in charge, the convoluted nature of it, the various contracts and those
kinds of things. Once we decided to stop the project, then we began to look at the contracts
that were in place and those kinds of things that were there. We hope to prevent all of that this
time in term of being much more deliberate in trying to get the project done. I think the
time frame pushed people to do things that they may would have done but may not have done as a
result of having limited time. Great. Thank you, Secretary. Senator Newman, do you have any follow-up
questions? A couple. So, Secretary, again, thank you for your testimony today. I'm sure this is
not your first choice after Thanksgiving. So, you know, we talked a little bit about
responsibilities and assignments. Is there an org chart? I mean, I know, you know,
Chair has asked for some documentation. Is there an org chart that shows who does what,
particularly as it relates to these kinds of technology projects at the Secretary of State?
There is a now and we can get you that information. We've been redoing the org
chart for the whole organization because I really believe people should be responsible.
I appreciate that. And so, you know, I think it's important to note that this is one of many
responsibilities that have become very data intensive that this office is responsible for. And
historically, you know, it's been an evolution, right? There used to be a bunch of cabinets with
papers and you can come look them up and that transition to a, you know, paperless kind of
database system is obviously very challenging, especially given the size and scope of the state
and your responsibilities. And so, you know, as it relates to this, right, so we've talked about
sort of future plans, but I am one and I hear constantly from others about challenges accessing
the system, right? And so, you know, I probably point out that for the average user, they make no
distinction between a data interruption and an outage and, you know, let's call it a data
interruption. It is not uncommon to try and look for data. So, I understand kind of what you're
endeavoring to do long term, but what if anything can be done, you know, within budget, within resources
as an interim solution to minimize these outages? And I see Mr. Cormier shaking his head, right?
And the answer seems to be by your facial expression, probably nothing, but if you wouldn't mind.
I got my lead database engineer behind here and there's a couple of things we want to do. That's
a great question. So, you know, a lot of stuff we look at because the code is very, you know,
old, we can't change it. A lot of stuff we do are going to be what we call proof of concept. We have
to try it out first to see if it's going to work. So, a lot of these guys, the smart guys that are
not talking right now are behind the scenes. They're looking at virtualization, if it's applicable.
We're looking at, you know, moving the Oracle database, which is the biggest improvement we've
seen over the last year to new hardware. And the type of outages you guys have now is different.
So, with moving the database to TMS, the type of outages we have recover really quickly. Before
we do that. And if you wouldn't mind, when we say recover quickly. So, organically the system
repairs itself? No, no. So, what I mean is the database is still up, but other web components
or services are down. All they need to be done is restarting. But when the database is not
working or not functioning, that is a longer process. And since we moved it to TMS, the
database has been almost 100% rock solid. So, that means a lot of the outages we have are
different type of outages maybe compared to two years ago. I'm only just guessing that because
we moved it, we've seen the improvement. So, the type of outages we have right now are significantly
less interruption time as probably before maybe two or three years ago. So, we're continuously
looking at different ways without messing up the code, without taking down Cal access. So,
we just brainstorm. So, there's a lot of things we're looking at. But again, this is all proof of
concept because it's not supported code. No one wants to touch it. No vendor wants to touch it.
So, we really have to think outside the box when it comes to that.
And just a couple more questions. So, at some point, there's an alert, right? And you've
sort of outlined how many there are in average month. But that requires some level of human
intervention at some point. So, what's, is it 24-7 support? What level of support do you have?
If it's during a workday, I assume somebody's there. But on weekends, night, what happens?
I'll give you an example. If we have an alert at 12 o'clock in the morning, the system comes up,
we have somebody say, hey, if we have a channel, can someone reboot the server? Because it hasn't
responded. We have somebody that manually go in and reboot it. So, it is our best effort 24x7.
The monitoring capabilities, it gives us real-time access to see when the system is down or not
responding. And then, a couple of times, we have to interact with that. But yes, we have people who
are constantly, you know, getting these alerts and asking other members of the team to restart
their service to bring it back up. So, it's a very manual process. It's not automated. And IT,
we like automation. We tend to like that. But with this system, our hands are tied behind the back.
We really can't do automation. So, it's a very manual process we do. It's the best effort. And
as we grow as IT, we have more resources, more resources coming on that can help facilitate
these changes. So, it's not unlikely that a member of the public or somebody at the FVPC and access
to the system might be the first person to discover that there's an outage or a data
interruption. So, is there a facility for the public to alert your staff, your tech team,
that there's a problem with the system that they're not getting? I would say that we would
probably already know. For example, if a person, I give you a hypothetical
realistic, if we're working on rebooting the system, a customer might be trying to access it
and it's temporarily available. And by the time they reach out to us, it's already resolved and
recovered. It's restored. We see the system. And so, your question was, there's a mechanism for
contacting. I don't think there is a tool or mechanism to contact us, but we're alerted
on the system. And most likely, if there's interruption, most likely it's being rebooted. So,
there's chance that customers like, hey, I cannot get to this web page or the CalXS and then two
minutes later, it's up again. I appreciate it. So, most likely. So, if I'm using the system and I
can't get a result, it is most likely that somebody's aware of the problem. Correct. But it's not
guaranteed. It's not guaranteed. Okay. So, getting back to kind of the larger question. So, looking
forward, if we stipulate that 24 to 36 months from now, you'll have a new system in place,
battle tested. What can we do in the interim? Right? I mean, that's a long interval for people to
have challenges accessing, you know, what should be very transparent information.
Yeah. So, again, you're again, I think the thing we're talking about is, first of all, making sure
that we have reliability on it if something goes down. Again, trying to test out some of the proof
of concept we have was, you know, breaking up different services into their own entities.
What I mean by that is just kind of looking at how the code is and see what we can do as far as
resources. That's our biggest thing right now. So, again, we have to try out. We have a couple things
that, you know, that we want to try in the future to see if it can enhance it. The stability, you
know, for us is the recovery time. We're going to have allergies. I mean, that's just the system it
is. But what we try to do is have as minimal as possible. The most significant one, I keep going
back to it because these are the ones that we really have no controller at this point, is really
trying to come up with a second path to the database if that path goes down. I believe
that the number of outages as far as how long they're out will be significantly reduced. So,
we would get a lot of people who may not call in because the system hasn't been down for over 24
hours. That's just my opinion and my observation. No, I appreciate it. Thank you. Yeah. Terrific.
Thank you, Secretary Weber. Thank you for taking the time to speak with us today and all the
leadership and frustrations that come with the job that you have been appointed to quite appropriately.
We're going to continue to... Can I add one thing? I just want to thank you for your honesty,
right, for your candor in this. I mean, that is refreshing when it comes to these things for
somebody to actually sit up here, take responsibility, you know, admit what needs fixing and propose to
fix it. So, I appreciate that. But my mama said, if you tell a lie, you have to put legs on it to
make it stand up. So, it's a constant job to keep a lie alive. You tell the same over and over.
That's the mom from Arkansas, right? That's the Arkansas stuff, you know.
You were touching those roots. Well, thank you guys for having us. I mean, I appreciate it. It's
been a journey. I can tell you that. It's been a journey. But I think this team is so committed to
making this work. I mean, the fact that they're 24-7 is really true. By the time I hear about
anything that's been done and they're on it 24-7, they're increasing their team because I asked them,
I said, you have to keep this thing alive. And they've taken that on. They've never been asked to
do that before. And so, they're taking it on and looking at new ways to store the data, to working
with the internet. All these kinds of things that they come to me and show me these projects that
they have discovered will work to keep this thing alive. And that is reassuring as well as them
working on the new project itself. Thank you. Thank you very much. And we look forward to maybe an
update in the coming year. We hope to be able to give you that good update. Thank you. Thank you.
Thanks. All right. I know we've run a little long there and we appreciate the patience of our
witnesses to come. I'm going to ask them to consolidate their testimony. I want to invite
Mr. Brian Metzger from the legislative analyst office to come join us.
You don't need to stay, but your staff's always welcome to listen in. But it's up to you.
Thank you. Okay. Let me invite Brian to come up. And Brian, as you're coming up,
I know you had a presentation here and a lot of the data, the historical stuff has been covered.
And so, I really would like you to focus in on some of the questions that you've heard us talk
about. Come on up. Are you at the table or is he over there? Okay. We've benefited from your
presentation that we've all reviewed in terms of the history. But maybe if you want to summarize
that, you can. But really, we're looking forward. What lessons did you think we've learned? What did
you hear today that worries you or inspires you? And going forward, I know that there's a road map
which you've identified. What is it about that road map that has your ears and eyes at attention
and ours as well? That's where if we could maybe jump off to that space if it's okay with you.
Sure. Absolutely. Brian Metzger with the Legislative Analyst Office. Thanks for inviting us to testify
today. You know, I think it would be helpful at least to cover a little bit of the project history.
I know we've talked about perspective. We've talked about OSAS just to give a little bit
of perspective about the project assessment. I think it informs what lessons we can learn
and what the path forward is for this project. One thing that was mentioned is, you know,
there were a number of flaws with the initial implementation of this project, some of which
have been mentioned, but I just want to run through them because I think it's instructive for the
next steps on this project. One of them was flawed testing activities. Some of the staff
didn't know exactly what they were testing or were not prepared to test the system that was
being developed. There was a reluctance to accept valid risks to the project's goals and objectives
that were actually raised by internal stakeholders within SOS. And then system components that were
being developed were so tightly coupled with the business rules that are required to actually run
the system that when you needed to make a change in business rules, it would actually require changes
across the entire system. And so there was no separate business rules engine that could actually
be updated based on legislation or other changes that were made. I think the path forward has
already been mentioned. There is a memorandum of understanding between the Department of
Technology and the Secretary of State's office to voluntarily submit this project through the
project approval life cycle. The stage one documentation, which is the business analysis,
which provides the business goals for the project, has already been approved. And now the project
is working on its stage two documentation, and that will give us the preliminary baseline cost,
schedule, and scope for the project going forward. The Secretary of State's office is expecting that
to be available spring of 2023, along with whatever budget request is going to be necessary to go
into 2023-24. I think one of the lessons learned that is evident from reading the project assessment
and looking at the project roadmap is that as the Secretary of State's office mentioned,
working with the system integrator vendor is very important, but the ultimate authority
and responsibility rests with the Secretary of State's office, that they need to be involved in
the project, they need to be working alongside the vendor, but they ultimately need to be involved
in making sure they're assessing risk and mitigating those risks as the project continues.
We've also seen from the project roadmap that was submitted as part of the project assessment,
an initial project cost that they estimate would be reasonable for this project and the range of
$50 million and a development timeline of approximately 27 months. So were we to assume
that given what the project approval life cycle looks like right now, which is supposed to end
in spring of 2024, this project could be finished in sometime June 2026. So that's the kind of
timeline we're looking at for this project. And happy to answer any other questions you might have.
You heard, thank you. Thank you for that. Again, for the broader review that we've
all read and seen that you were kind enough not to go through with us now, but we heard about the
contracts that were offered up. Some of them were disclosed today. This is a contract with
Prospecta with deliverables that they have argued were a part of that contract. Have you seen that
contract? I have not. Okay. And obviously you would support the idea of a contract based on
deliverables. Yes. Versus a time and materials contract. So if you look backwards now and say,
well, where did we go wrong? It was projected at $11 million in 2016. I don't know if you found a
flaw in those projections at that time. But what did we miss to have all these years go by
where we're sitting here today really frustrated? Secretary is we are all now the cost of quadrupled
or greater. What should we have learned from that? I mean, should the legislature be more
attentive to those contracts when they're issued? Should we have reviews of those contracts of such
significance so we just don't let them run its course and then find out years later that
mistakes were made? Is there any lessons there? Yeah, I think the lesson learned from the initial
contract was that Prospecta was trying to implement a commercial off the shelf solution
for something that has really complex requirements. And so when you're trying to just take software
you've developed and put it in and assume that it's going to work properly for something as complex
as disclosure, campaign disclosure and lobbying statements. It's not necessarily going to work
if you don't really take into account how much customization needs to be done. And so I think
that over the years, the four years that Prospecta was the vendor, that really wasn't understood until
the end when it was too late to actually address. And with OSAS it was just such a condensed timeline.
You were talking about eight months to a year to implement something that over four years couldn't
even be implemented. And so there was just not enough time and they really did not understand
all of those complex requirements up front. So they underbid and overpromised. I think when you
look forward about kind of the issue of oversight, I think certainly oversight of the contracts for
these vendors is very important, understanding how the procurement was done, making sure that the
procurement was done competitively, that there were multiple bidders, that there was in some
cases proofs of concept as part of the procurement so you can test whether there are
the correct scenarios that are going to be addressed by the solution that you're trying
to procure. And that is something that is being done more routinely with today's IT projects as
opposed to four or five years ago. But certainly I think watching the procurement, making sure you
understand kind of what vendors are participating and asking for information about those contracts,
whether they're fixed, you know, price contracts with deliverables and kind of gated reviews,
those are all important things to ask as you go through even the budget process and you're looking
at kind of the next year's appropriations. Right. Okay. Thank you, Senator Newman. Any questions?
Yeah, it kind of comes back to the same question I asked of the Secretary. So,
you know, what have we learned? How do we get through to, you know, that end date for the
next implementation? And probably more importantly, how do we prevent this? I mean, Senator Gilles has
raised a good question about contracts, but more generally, from your perspective,
what's the big lesson here that we as legislators might apply either legislatively or through oversight?
I think one of the big lessons is that using the state's IT project approval processes is
important. I think one of the issues was that there was an exemption in the bill that was intended
to expedite the development and implementation of this system. I think the project approval
lifecycle that the project is going through now is a robust process and it involves multiple
stakeholders. The legislature gets documentation at every stage of the process, so it can review
those, it can understand what is being assumed, you know, what procurement is being used, what are
the requirements, what are the objectives, it's all there in writing and it can be reviewed.
I think exemptions cause a lack of transparency about what's going on as the project's being
planned. I think lessons learned, it's really understanding those complex business requirements
and technical requirements up front and making sure that the vendors are aware of that and being
honest about any of the potential roadblocks that could be faced as they develop the system.
I think there's too much optimism oftentimes with vendors that they can get things done
on schedule and, you know, within budget. I think having a clear understanding of the contingency,
really, what are our contingency plans, what is our rollback plan if this doesn't go according to
plan, you know, and what kind of cost overruns can we anticipate. I think those are all of the
lessons learned from this last iteration. And my last question said, do you feel like Mr.
Metzger, that at this point, you know, again, to my question about it more generally, that you have
enough visibility into this process, especially as it relates to responsibilities and progress
at this point, that you'd feel comfortable? At this point, I would say that the Secretary
of State's office has been very helpful in helping us understand where they are with the project
currently. We've met with them several times. I would also say that we have discussions with
Department of Technology about kind of their role in this process and our understanding of
kind of what they're going to offer as they plan this project has been helpful. I think it's very
early on in the planning stages, to be honest. We're only in stage one. We have the business
goals. A lot of the stuff that's reusable has been put into that. We need to really see that
preliminary cost schedule and scope. And that's part of that stage two documentation. We need to
see the market research. We need to kind of get an understanding of kind of what solutions were
considered and really have a firm understanding that all options were considered. And I think
that will come in spring of 2023 and will certainly be there to look at it. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Mesker. I just want to note the irony of the provision in that 2016 legislation
that was meant to expedite the systems being implemented that gave them flexibility to move
outside of the Department of Technology's standards has actually turned to be the complete opposite
from your point of view in getting us into this sinkhole that we are in today. We're very good.
Well, thank you. And thank you for your continued monitoring of this work. We appreciate it very
much. Thank you. Thank you. I next want to invite up Ms. Lindsay Nakano. She's the
Fair Political Praxis Commission Senior Legislative Counsel. Ms. Nakano, thank you for being a part
of our conversation today. We again welcome your testimony. I encourage you to consolidate it as
you appropriate given what we have heard already. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair, Senator Newman.
Again, I'm Lindsay Nakano, Senior Legislative Counsel with the FPPC. Thank you for the opportunity
to speak. Our comments today are forward-looking. We're looking forward to the upcoming replacement
system and the improvements that it will create for the filing process and increased transparency.
And the Commission agrees with Secretary Weber's comments today that we would rather take the
time to ensure an excellent system rather than rush things and end up with a poor result. In
its capacity consulting on the CARS project, the Commission has provided guidance on the legal
requirements of the system, as well as detailed feedback throughout the many stages of the project,
including during the testing process. Over the past several months, the Commission has been working
to become an even more helpful, collaborative partner with the Secretary of State's office,
including by gathering information about other jurisdictions' electronic filing systems
that we think provide a good end product in order to be able to contribute a more educated
perspective throughout the development of the system. Today, I'm going to briefly outline three
general points of functionality that we look forward to in the new system that we think will
create significant benefits. First, we look forward to the creation of a more intuitive system that
will help ease the burden of compliance for filers. An important part of this is the fact that the
system will be data-driven, which we understand to mean transaction-based, in contrast to our
current system which is form-based. A data-driven transaction-based system would allow a candidate
or committee to log into the system and input transactions, like contributions, expenditures,
or loans, independent of any particular form. One of the benefits of this is that the filer would
only need to input a particular transaction once, even if the transaction is required to be reported
on more than one kind of statement or report. For regular campaign statements, ideally the system
would alert filers when a report is coming due, and once all of the transactions are entered
during a reporting period, the system would be designed to auto-populate reports with all the
transactions covered during that period, and the filer would then be able to review their final
report and file it, which would be possible with only a couple clicks of a mouse button.
In order to make the new filing process as smooth as possible, the commission is also exploring a
legislative proposal to streamline some of the technical requirements for signing and filing
campaign statements in consultation with the Secretary of State's office. We are continuing
to gather information on exactly what changes will be helpful and beneficial, and we will continue
to explore and develop these solutions in the weeks leading up to the next legislative session.
Second, we look forward to a new system that will improve the usability of the public-facing
search website to increase transparency for the public. In particular, we look forward to a
search system that presents information and data in an easily understandable format and that has
robust filtering options and intuitive navigation. To learn more about what is possible in this area,
Commission staff reviewed dozens of other campaign finance public search sites in other states.
One example of another state that does this all very well is Idaho. Recognizing that California
is a much larger state with more activity, we nonetheless hope that California will strive
to create the best possible search tools, including by looking to other jurisdictions for inspiration
that will help the public make sense of the massive amounts of information that will be contained in
the system. Third and last, we look forward to a new system that will be flexible and will allow
for future improvements to the filing schedule and related reporting requirements. Due to the age
of the current system, as we know, it has limited ability to accommodate changes to the reporting
and filing requirements and changes that can be made often require significant costs. After the
new system is certified, there will almost certainly be legislative changes to the reporting
requirements in subsequent years and the Commission believes that it is crucial that the new system
is built to be flexible to accommodate these changes. One of those future legislative changes
may potentially include redesigning the campaign filing schedule to go into effect sometime after
CARS is certified. We think the new system will present an opportunity to re-evaluate the campaign
finance filing schedule. Our current filing schedule was built over time, as you know, as a
result of many pieces of legislation, and our staff thinks that we will be approaching a period where
it will be both possible and greatly beneficial to redesign our filing schedule in a holistic way
based on best practices and taking advantage of the new technology that will become available.
The Commission is just beginning to explore and start conversations in this area,
and we anticipate it will be a multi-year discussion on long-term project.
Thank you again to this committee for your time and attention and for holding this hearing today.
Thank you, Mr. Kano. A couple questions for me. Were you consulted on the decision to not make the
reboot occur in June of 2021? Were you consulted on that, the Commission?
I'm not aware of whether we were consulted before the announcement was made. I do know that the
Commission supported and sent a letter supporting the 2019 delay in the system.
You don't know whether you were consulted on this last decision to not go live in 2021?
Not before the decision was made. And was the Commission or consulted at all on the contracts
that were performed for this reboot?
I'm not aware. I was not with the Commission at that time. I could consult with staff and
provide that information. As a part of the legislation, the Hertzberg
legislation in 2016 was that the Secretary work in partnership with the FPPC on this work.
So I'm interested in knowing whether that happened or not. Going backwards, I know you've laid out
the standards that you'd like to see going forward, but we're trying to learn also from what happened
and be interested in knowing whether the Commission was consulted on any of those contracts
and on the decision to not go forward. And maybe subsequent follow-up, you can let us know.
Senator Newman, any questions? Just real quickly to your third point about
flexibility of the new system, Mr. Kono. Thank you, by the way, for being here today.
When you say possibly redesigning, the final schedule will be more flexible.
I assume you mean to provide greater real-time insight or do you mean something else?
We envision looking at the filing schedule as a whole, looking at other jurisdictions,
what they do in order to streamline the filing schedule for filers while also maintaining
high transparency. So what that could look like is reducing some of the activity-based
reporting. So that's the on-demand reporting that's earlier in the year and increasing
regular reporting, for example, to monthly or something similar. So that way there is regular
reporting. It's easier for filers to anticipate when their reports will be due while also maintaining
that transparency for filers on a regular schedule. And then, you know, with respect to sort of a
more transactional approach, I assume that's inclusive, right? So that would make it much
easier for a campaign to have their data in the system to close out a reporting period, correct?
That's correct, yes. Got it. That makes sense. Thank you.
Great. Thank you, Senator Newman. Thank you, Mr. Kono, for being a part of the conversation today.
Thank you. All right. We want to invite next. We have three speakers representing organizations
that use Cal Access to file reports. First, we're going to hear from a speaker representing the
California Political Treasures Association. Ms. Stacy Owens is a board member of that group,
and she's going to be joining us remotely. Ms. Owens, welcome to our hearing, and you
can hear us. Hopefully we can hear you. You're ready to go.
Yes, yes. If you can hear me, we're ready to go.
Yes, we can. And I have been actually editing my presentation as we go along,
so that I don't take up too much of your time. I thank you for inviting us at the CPTA.
I just wanted to briefly explain who we are. The California Political Treasures Association
is the only Treasures Association industry group in the entire country. We're the only state who
has one of these. We meet regularly, quarterly, and excuse me, share best practices along with
discussing new regulations and what you would expect, things of interest to our community.
And so, of course, Cal Access has been a huge, huge point of discussion at the Political Treasures
Association. Some challenges that we have in our industry is that we are very niche.
There are not many people who do what we do because it's a combination of compliance and
accounting. So, we have to understand regulation. We have to be able to
make sure that what our clients are doing is proper and legal in real time in the middle
of heated campaigns. In addition to that, we need to be keeping all of their accounting data like
you would for any normal bookkeeper for any business, and we have to be able to file all
of these forms. And in the state of California, in many jurisdictions. So, ultimately, a point
of discussion at our association has been that we would love to get to a place in the future
where the Secretary of State is the only filing officer, and we can file all in one place. I
think that that would create a lot more transparency to the public at large, and it would also
make it easier to know where to file. In some cases, it can be difficult to know who our filing
officer is. And so, with that being said, it's really of interest to us that the Cal Access project
is implemented very well, and that it is implemented using softwares and processes
that we already are using. We have industry software, we have net files, statecraft, ISP,
Aristotle, NGP. These are softwares that we count on to be able to put in our data,
and not only for filing with you, but for, you know, making sure that all the transactions
are in, reconciling our bank statements, giving reports to our clients so that they understand,
at any point in a campaign, where they are with their budget. These are important softwares to us,
and whatever is implemented needs to be able to work with those softwares and those systems that
we already have in place. And on that note, you're going to hear me saying that file again.
But we at the association would like to point out that net file is the main software for
city and county filers in the state. So, they're not only the software that we are using often
on the professional treasurer side, but they're also the software that we are filing into when
we file with, you know, San Francisco, Oakland, et cetera. They seem to have a system that's
already working. And we have been asking along the way in this process if the secretary of state,
the FPPC, everybody who's involved, could work more closely with net file to create this new
filing system, because it works. And it works on the other end, too. It works for the public. We
often need to look up, you know, did this filing go through. It's instantaneous to go on to
Oakland or San Francisco or, you know, any of the other net file cities and counties,
you know, type in the ID number of the committee, type in the name of the committee, type in a
partial name of the committee, and instantly get access to the filings. You can see donors. It's
a beautiful search system. So, you know, I think that my biggest takeaway from this system is,
is that we have something that works. At least it works on a smaller scale. And it's, it would be
very nice, in our opinion, as a treasurer's association, if we could scale that and have
something similar on the state level. Great. I think people here in the hearing room are taking
notes, so thank you for making that point. Thank you. Anything else, Ms. Owens? Nothing from me,
unless anyone has questions, but absolutely the position about the CPTA.
Actually, real quickly, we can get to it later to, I guess, Mr. Cormier, about that suggestion
and whether or not we'll get to it later. Yeah, let's hold it. Let's put a pin on it. We'll come
back to it. Ms. Owens, thank you. It's good to see you here at, for full disclosure, your firm
works for me and one of my committees, and I'm happy to see you are the designator from the
Treasurer's Association to participate today. So, thank you for all your wisdom and knowledge.
Thank you for inviting us. I appreciate it. Terrific. Okay, we're going to now invite Ms.
Lacey Keyes, President of the California Political Attorneys Association, to provide some testimony
today. She's here in the hearing room. You've heard the conversation that has taken place,
and hopefully you can enhance it versus repeat it. Thank you for being here. Thank you,
Chairman Glazier, Senator Newman. I want to reiterate the thank you for the opportunity
for the Political Attorneys Association to provide some comments, to give some context to my
participation, in addition to my work with CPIA. I've been part of what was called the
Stakeholder Input Group, which is the industry folks who participated with SOS and the various
contractors to provide feedback. I was also a beta tester of the system, one of the third-party
people that actually got to go in and kick the wheels a little bit. So, my comments have scratched
out the ones people have already said, and I've focused them on what we hope to see in the new
system, which is informed by some of the challenges we saw with the prior iteration of cars.
So, the first comment I'll make is that CPIA hopes to see the system recognize that the vast
majority of users are not one-off campaigns entering their own data real-time in the state system to
prepare filings, but I think Netfile, the vendor that was mentioned, has done an analysis, and it's
upwards 85% or more of the system users use third-party software. Most of them use either CPTA,
CPIA-type vendors, and I mention that because the first version of the system was very much
developed with a mindset that the individual treasurer is going to track every contribution in
the state system and then hit submit the reports, and as a practical matter, most people are not
going to be putting data into the system until it's filing time. So, that just piggybacks on
Stacey's comments about really having a system that works with those third-party vendors so
that we can submit data when it's time. There were some issues with the prior version where
there was a notion the data would have to be submitted before we could even see what our
filings would look like, which caused great concern to the attorneys who are responsible
for making sure everything's accurate, and the software vendors can provide more detail on that
in the input process, but just flagging that, it's actually very important from kind of a legal
perspective. Our second high point relates to signature verification. The prior version was
kind of built out with the assumption that everyone who signs a report is going to go through a
multi-factor authentication process, which means the governor would have to do that to sign his
campaign reports, someone running for city council, as well as every sponsor of a committee, and so
just making sure that, again, in recognition of our vendor industry that we're authorizing vendors
so that then we can do what we need to do for the filers and they can worry about their campaigns.
A couple other comments I wanted to highlight, so it's already been mentioned, the vendors,
but one of the things we saw was the vendors in the prior system didn't know anything about
California reporting requirements, and so the regulated community would say, well, we need to
be able to do X because the statute requires us to do X, and that feedback wasn't really being
taken into consideration and development, so whether the primary vendor has California experience
or they're brought in as a consultant, there's a lot of valuable experience that exists in
California that can be tapped as a resource. In terms of testing, regular users like myself
and others were able to test early on and provide feedback, and I think that was valuable to helping
the Secretary of State's office realize that we were not ready for go live, and I would encourage
that process to continue earlier rather than later, since we're the folks that are going to identify
a lot of the nuances that can be fixed. Speaking of feedback, one of the challenges in the last
iteration with the third party project manager was we would provide feedback and then never hear
about it again, and a lot of that feedback was not taken, so I would encourage kind of as we're
thinking about the process to have a system to track that feedback and actually circle back to it.
I know SOS's staff tried to implement that at the end with OSAS, but it was kind of too late for
them to be able to do that, and then one other item that hasn't been raised but I think is an
important one is the current system, and I think the way that CARS 1.0 was being developed still
required a lot of human intervention by Secretary of State staff, and I'll give a practical example.
A lobby registration renewals were due in December of 2020, and data related to those
registrations as late as last month still hadn't been manually entered by the team at SOS on Cal
Access, so if a filer changed their address, for example, the old address was still on there,
and that's by no means a reflection on the staff. They have so much work and they work very hard,
but we should be able to update our registration information and have the system automatically
accepted upon e-filing, so things like practical things like that we'd like to see in the system.
So that's all I have in terms of my prepared comments that I don't think had been previously
stated. Thank you, all very helpful and informative, certainly the feedback on the testing,
and as well as the lack of feedback from the project manager that you experienced. Again,
I'd never heard of the firm perspective before this hearing. It seemed to indicate they're not
California based, and therefore weren't aware of our rules and regulations. That was my takeaway.
I can't speak to where they're domiciled, but just our experience and back and forth with them,
we talked to them about 24-hour reporting, and it was like they had no idea about the different
requirements. Terrific. Senator Newman, any questions? No, no question, but thank you very much. Thank
you for your time. Thank you. Thank you very much. We're going to move on to John Valencia,
representing the California Institute of Governmental Advocates. John is chair of the
Institute's legislative committee. Mr. Valencia, as I understand it, lobbyists have been paying for
this upgrade for quite a while now. Since the beginning, Senator. Yes, so you have a stake in it
both ways, both as a contributor to the system as well as wanting a system that's responsive to you.
So we welcome your session. Thank you for the invitation to appear. Good morning, Mr. Chair,
Senator Newman. IGA, the Institute of Governmental Advocates, was founded in 1974,
immediately following the enactment of the Act. The Act, the Political Reform Act,
has three major constituencies, public officials in their public official capacity,
campaign committees and lobbyists, lobbyist firms and lobbyist employers, whether those are clients
or in-house lobbyist employers for individuals in that capacity. Our reporting, our compliance,
is infinitely simpler and our organization doesn't believe that we should be dependent on a cottage
industry of third-party technology intermediaries. Ideally, in our world in California, we should
be able to log on with a specified account hosted by the Secretary of State to file registrations,
file amendments, file updates that are very simple, additions, deletions, quarterly reports and the
like, which are vastly different than the regularity and the frequency and the magnitude of campaign
reporting. It's obvious that the transparency sought by the Act is not going to be achieved
unless there's a simple, at least in our corner of the regulated field, unless there's a simple and
intuitive site hosted by the Secretary of State that allows us to comply, not only with existing
law, but with some technological overlays that are a function of legislation. On a policy front,
we have two recommendations. First, respectfully, we recommend that the legislature pause adding
additional legislative legal requirements that translate into technological overlays and requirements
for a system that's under reconstruction. I think you heard a prior speaker speak to that
and several offer cautions on that front. Senate Bill 459 from the just concluded session, which
moved through this committee, imposes time-sensitive disclosure requirements, 48 hours, but given the
timeframes that you're hearing from the Secretary of State and the terms within that statute,
we'll be fortunate to see that measure implemented by 2030, if that. So the system, because it's
a matter of law, will have to accommodate that in order for it, at some point, within a year of
the certification of the system, be able to accommodate the new requirement for exigent filings.
So we urge the legislature, the various stakeholders, the FPPC, to just take a pause and let the new
system come into existence. And we see the new system development providing an opportunity.